%
% task2.tex
%
% A simple shell and directory listing support.
%

\section{A Simple Shell}

\subsection{Counting files}
This section explains the implementation of a system call, called
\verb|syscall_filecount|, that takes a character pointer as argument and
returns an integer. The syscall returns the number of files in the volume with
the name given as argument, or if it is called with the argument \verb|NULL|,
it returns the number of mounted file system volumes. If the argument character
array is not a mounted volume name or if an error occured, a negative integer
is returned (using the macro error codes defined in \file{vfs.h}), indicating
an error.

The syscall handling is added to \file{tests/lib.\{h,c\}}. The header file
contains the declaration of the \verb|syscall_filecount| function and
\file{lib.c} contains the implementation, shown in figure
\ref{code:filecount_handling}.

\codefig{filecount_handling}{tests/lib.c}{188}{191}{Filecount syscall handling.}

This function just utilizes the assembly syscall wrapper function
\verb|_syscall| for issuing a syscall instruction from C. This syscall is
handled in \file{proc/syscall.c} and this just passes the parameter onto a new
function \verb|vfs_count|, defined in \file{fs/vfs.c} and declared in the
correspondig header file. This code except from \file{proc/syscall.c} is shown
in figure \ref{code:filecount_syscall}.

\codefig{filecount_syscall}{proc/syscall.c}{279}{281}{Filecount syscall handling.}

The interface, so to speak, to the file system for performing the described
counting task is implemented in the \file{fs/vfs.c} file. That is, the function
\verb|vfs_count|, shown in figure \ref{code:vfs_count}, retrieves the
filesystem of the given volume name and calls the actual \verb|count| function
implmented in the file system that implements the interface specified in the
virtual file system. This design is somewhat object-oriented, allowing for
other file system implementations to be added and used wihtout change, if they
implement the functions specified in, and called from, the virtual file system.

\codefig{vfs_count}{fs/vfs.c}{900}{923}{Filecount virtual file system interface.}

The actual work is performed in the trivial file system, in the new function
\verb|tfs_count|. The trivial file system structure, of type \verb|tfs_t|, is
accessed through the \verb|internal| field in the argument file system
structure. The lock of the file system is acquired, i.e. by calling procure on
the semaphore, securing mutual exclusion on file system access. The
\verb|buffer_md| field is an array of points to type \verb|tfs_direntry_t|,
which contain the inode and name of the file. The array is traversed and for
each entry with an inode that is greater than zero, the return value variable
is incremented. The inode that is greater than zero indicated that the array
entry struct is a valid and existing file in the file system volume.

\codefig{tfs_count}{fs/tfs.c}{822}{836}{Filecount trivial file system implementation.}

After the loop, the semaphore is released and the variable \verb|ret|, that
contains the number of files in the volume, is returned.
